[RFC 0001] Shabka CLI design (#282)
kalbasit/shabka: rfcs/0001-shabka-usage-design.md

---
feature: shabka-usage-design
start-date: 2019-10-14
author: Marc 'risson' Schmitt
co-authors:
related-issues: https://github.com/kalbasit/shabka/projects/10 https://github.com/kalbasit/shabka/issues/263 https://github.com/kalbasit/shabka/issues/246 https://github.com/kalbasit/shabka/issues/55 https://github.com/kalbasit/shabka/issues/281
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

The goal is to design a system where `shabka` is just a tool like
`home-manager`, and relies on configuration files provided by the user.
The tools and ways to configure at the disposition of the user would be those:

* the command `shabka`, installed like `home-manager` which basically does the
  stuff the user wants to do on a regular basis that we currently have in
  `./scripts` ;
* a `dotshabka` like directory for the user's personal preferences settings and
  default values for `shabka` options, or overriding stuff we define in
  `shabka`. We will refer to this as `dotshabka-user` ;
* a `dotshabka` like directory for the user's hosts. We will refer to this as

>   `.shabka`.

Reviewer: When I initially read this, I left a comment about using one directory. But then I read the section below (`## .shabka for hosts configuration`) and it turns out you did intend to use one directory. Do we really need then two parameters `.shaba` and `dotshabka-user`? Did I miss something?

Author: Here's what we would have following this design for a single user installation:
* shabka command
* `.config/shabka` containing:
  - hosts
  - user global personal configuration (what's in `dotshabka/modules`)
  - user per-host personal configuration
But for a multi-user installation, we would have several of those last two entries. `user global personal configuration` would be once per user. `user per-host personal configuration` would be once per user per host.
Hence, I think we could put the hosts in one repository, and the user configurations in another repository.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

This is important in the process of making `shabka` usable for everyone. A
simple CLI, plus good documentation on how to create configuration files, will
allow the user to quickly get a hang on the tool.

The planned use cases are very simple for now, and can be described as this:

* Usage on a NixOS system, with root access.
* Management of several hosts' configuration
* Management of several users per-host.

> * Management of several users' configuration per-host.

Reviewer: Do you mind including `* Usage on a Darwin system, with root access.`. The entire paragraph re-written below for clarity.

```
* Usage on a NixOS system, with root access.
** Management of several hosts' configuration
** Management of several users per-host.
** Management of several users' configuration per-host.
* Usage on a Darwin system, with root access.
** Management of several hosts' configuration
** Management of several users per-host.
** Management of several users' configuration per-host.
```

The expected outcome is a tool well-documented, easy to use, that can fit easily

> inside an existing workflow of managing NixOS and home-manager configurations.

Reviewer: We should probably mention that they need to convert their existing NixOS/home manager's settings.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

We'll discuss the three aspects previously introduced in [Summary](#summary).

## `shabka` CLI

> The `shabka` CLI will be used by the user to do what he can currently do using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `shabka` CLI will be used by the user to do what they can currently do using
```

> the tools is the `scripts/` directory. This will allow him to do everything he

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the tools in the `scripts/` directory. This will allow them to do everything they
```

could do using the `nixos-rebuild` command, plus building a host, checking what

> changed in his host's generation between two git refs, and maybe even pushing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changed in their host's generation between two git refs, and maybe even pushing
```

> his hosts' configurations to Cachix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their hosts' configurations to Cachix.
```

### `shabka build`

This will do what `scripts/build-host.sh` currently does. Its usage is:

```sh
shabka build [-r release] [host]
```

By default the `host` argument is the current hostname, the `release` argument
is the host's release (defined in `.hosts/hosts/{host}/.release`) if
defined, or `shabka`'s default, defined in `shabka/.release`.

> This command cannot build a host with a different kernel than the host it is
> being ran on, e.g. a `Darwin` host cannot be built on a `Linux` host.

This command takes care of setting all environment variables and options to
ensure a smooth `nix-build` depending on what is defined in `shabka`, `.shabka`
and `dotshabka-user`. The default locations of `.shabka` and `dotshabka-user`
are defined in their respective section of this document.

### `shabka diff`

This will do what `scripts/diff-host.sh` used to do. Its usage is:

```sh
shabka diff <host> <base-rev> [target-rev]
```

By default the `target-rev` argument is HEAD.

/!\ This section needs improvement given the fact that we now have 2
repositories to deal with (`shabka` and `.shabka`, as `dotshabka-user` is
defined in `.shabka`). This implies a lot of arguments and some designing

> around this command must be done.

Reviewer: I'm ok to leave this command until later. We can focus on the essentials for now.

Author: Added a comment about this, but leaving it here for reference.

### `shabka push-to-cachix`

This will do what `scripts/push-to-cachix.sh` currently does. Its usage is:

```sh
shabka push-to-cachix <cache-name> [host1] [host2] [host3] [...]
```

If no host is given, this command will push every host in `.shabka/hosts`. This
command requires the environment variable `CACHIX_SIGNING_KEY` to be set.

## `dotshabka-user` for a user configuration

This directory will be used to define a user's personal configuration.

This directory must have a `home.nix` that defines a

> function for the user as its now done in the `home.nix` inside a host's

Reviewer: The current host configuration in `dotshabka` does include a `home.nix` file, but this file is not actually imported by shabka, instead directly by the Host's configuration: https://github.com/kalbasit/dotshabka/blob/faed8dacea0b5b441ee1a24d71a2324022b63a7a/hosts/hades/configuration.nix#L23

I can inline `home.nix` in the `configuration.nix` and shabka would still build:

```
  imports = [
    ./hardware-configuration.nix

    "${shabka.external.nixos-hardware.path}/common/cpu/intel"
    "${shabka.external.nixos-hardware.path}/common/pc/laptop"
    "${shabka.external.nixos-hardware.path}/common/pc/laptop/ssd"

    <shabka/modules/nixos>

    ({
        shabka.home-manager.config = { userName, uid, isAdmin, home, nixosConfig }:
        { ... }:

        {
            shabka.workstation.enable = true;
        }
    })

    ../../modules/nixos
  ]
```

Author: This is discussed in an other thread.

> configuration. In this `home.nix`, the user can then define its personal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration. In this `home.nix`, the user can then define their personal
```

configuration, using the `home` module in `shabka`, overriding it, or directly
using `home-manager` configuration options.

There must also be a `default.nix` inside this directory, which imports
`home.nix` and can then be imported by a `.shabka` repository to be used as a
user's configuration.

This `default.nix` will later be imported inside a host's configuration, when
defining `shabka.users.users`, by assigning one function per user. This allows
for the user of the same host to have different configurations. Also, it makes
it easy for a user's configuration to be imported in several `.shabka`, and even
be used outside of the `shabka` use case.

## `.shabka` for hosts configuration

By default, `shabka` will look for this directory in `$HOME/.config/shabka` and
`$HOME/.shabka`, in this order. This should be configurable in some way. Here
is the expected structure of the directory:

* `external/`: Nix expressions for fetching externals such as a personal NUR,
  or a list of your SSH keys.
* `hosts/`: top-level expressions specific to individual hosts. The name of the
  host's folder must match its hostname.

Inside a host's directory, `shabka` will expect the following things:

> * `.uname`: either containing `Darwin` or `Linux`

Reviewer: I think the `.release` and the `.uname` names are poor design decisions on my part. I don't think there's value in hiding this file, in fact, I think it's counterproductive. Plus the file itself is already in a hidden directory. M

Author: How do you propose to handle this?

Reviewer: I propose just using `release` and `uname` instead of `.release` and `.uname`.

  - Management of a single users's configuration hosts-wide.
  - Management of a single users' configuration per-host.
* Usage on a Darwin system, with root access.
  - Management of several hosts' configuration
  - Management of several users per-host.
  - Management of a single users's configuration hosts-wide.
  - Management of a single users' configuration per-host.

The expected outcome is a tool well-documented, easy to use, that can fit easily
inside an existing workflow of managing NixOS and home-manager configurations.
The existing configurations would of course need to be tweaked to fit shabka's
workflow.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

We'll discuss the three aspects previously introduced in [Summary](#summary).

## `shabka` CLI

The `shabka` CLI will be used by the user to do what they can currently do using
the tools in the `scripts/` directory. This will allow them to do everything they
could do using the `nixos-rebuild` command, plus building a host, checking what
changed in their host's generation between two git refs, and maybe even pushing
their hosts' configurations to Cachix.

Here is what the CLI usage might look like:

### `shabka rebuild`

> This will do what `scripts/nixos-rebuild.sh` currently does. Its usage is:

Reviewer: - For NixOS, this will be `scripts/nixos-rebuild.sh`.
- For Darwin, this will be `scripts/darwin-rebuild.sh`.
- For Linux, non-nixos or for nixos non-root this should probably be around `home-manager`.

I'm thinking that we need to provide clear sub-commands instead of saying this will wrap X or Y tool. We could list them as `build`, `test`, `boot` and `switch`. We may later propose adding `build-vm` and `build-vm-with-bootloader`.

Author: Linux (non-nixos) are the subject of another RFC. Adding the rest in the RFC

Author: Actually, we could already support `build-vm` and `build-vm-with-bootloader`

```sh
shabka rebuild [-h host] [-r release] {nixos-rebuild arguments and options}
```

By default the `host` argument is the current hostname, the `release` argument
is the host's release (defined in `.shabka/hosts/{host}/.release`) if
defined, or `shabka`'s default, defined in `shabka/.release`.

This command takes care of setting all environment variables and options to
ensure a smooth `nixos-rebuild` depending on what is defined in `shabka`,
`.shabka` and `dotshabka-user`. The default locations of `.shabka` and
`dotshabka-user` are defined in their respective section of this document.

### `shabka build`

This will do what `scripts/build-host.sh` currently does. Its usage is:

```sh

> shabka build [-r release] [host]

Reviewer: What would be the difference between `shabka build` and `shabka rebuild build`?

  - Management of several users per-host.
  - Management of a single users's configuration hosts-wide.
  - Management of a single users' configuration per-host.

The expected outcome is a tool well-documented, easy to use, that can fit easily
inside an existing workflow of managing NixOS and home-manager configurations.
The existing configurations would of course need to be tweaked to fit shabka's
workflow.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

We'll discuss the three aspects previously introduced in [Summary](#summary).

## `shabka` CLI

The `shabka` CLI will be used by the user to do what they can currently do using
the tools in the `scripts/` directory. This will allow them to do everything
they could do using the `nixos-rebuild` command, plus building a host, checking
what changed in their host's generation between two git refs, and maybe even
pushing their hosts' configurations to Cachix.

Here is what the CLI usage might look like:

### On NixOS hosts: `shabka {switch | boot | test | build | dry-build | dry-activate}`

This will do what `scripts/nixos-rebuild.sh`, or `script/build-host.sh` for
`build shabka`, currently does. Its usage is:

```sh

> shabka {switch | boot | test | build | dry-build | dry-activate} [-h host] [-r release] [nixos-rebuild arguments and options]

Reviewer: It might be better to take the `-h [host] and the `-r [release]` before the build command. It's just a bit easier to parse because what if the `nixos-rebuild` command take or would take a `-h` or `-r`?

Author: Yes, it is how I implemented in #294 but forgot to change it here.
